FXUS64 KFWD 151135
AFDFWD

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Fort Worth TX
635 AM CDT Mon Jul 15 2019


.AVIATION...
/12Z TAFs/

No major concerns through the current TAF period. With a weak
surface pressure pattern across the area, winds are relatively
light this morning, and they should not increase much through the
day (generally less than 10 kt at all sites). Metroplex sites will
remain with light west/northwest flow before switching to more
southerly flow this afternoon into this evening, as a lee trough
to the west diurnally strengthens. KACT may remain relatively
light/variable this morning, although some westerly component
should be preferred, before switching to light southerly winds
this afternoon.

VFR expected at all sites through 12-18Z Tuesday. Isolated
convection may develop across Central Texas this afternoon and
evening, but should remain south of KACT. Otherwise, any overnight
convection will remain well northeast of the Metroplex.

Picca

&&


.SHORT TERM... /Issued 355 AM CDT Mon Jul 15 2019/
/Through Tonight/

After a cool (by mid-July standards) Sunday, temperatures will be
on the increase today, although the well-advertised heat gets
started in earnest on Tuesday. As Barry`s circulation continues to
unwind and depart to the northeast, northerly flow through 850 mb
will gradually turn to a more west/southwest direction this
afternoon. Along/west of I-35, mixing through approximately
850-800 mb and increased sunshine will boost temperatures into the
low/mid 90s, with heat indices in the 95-100 range. Farther east,
more persistent low-level cloud cover will reduce insolation,
keeping highs in the mid/upper 80s (still several degrees below
normal).

Despite Barry`s continued departure/demise, confluent bands
spiraling away from the center may yield isolated showers and
storms from Central Texas to East Texas this afternoon and
evening. With that said, drier air aloft and weak surface
convergence across our area will likely keep most storms displaced
to the south/east of our counties.

Muggier conditions will persist into tonight as dew points hang in
the lower 70s and temperatures only modestly cool after sunset.
Most guidance suggest a lobe of higher vorticity will rotate
around Barry`s circulation in the Ozarks and kick off warm-
advection storms near/northeast of the Arklatex late tonight.
While most of these cells should stay outside of our area, a
couple feeder cells could deepen sufficiently for a brief
shower/storm in the direction of Paris, generally after midnight.

Picca

&&

.LONG TERM... /Issued 355 AM CDT Mon Jul 15 2019/
/Tuesday Through the Upcoming Weekend/

By daybreak Tuesday morning, the last vestiges of Barry should be
beyond our northeast zones, beginning an extended period of rain-
free weather for North and Central Texas. After a few days with
below normal daytime temperatures, the heat will return in
dramatic fashion as subsidence on the back side of the departing
cyclone pushes temperatures into the upper 90s Tuesday afternoon.
Thanks to Barry, dew points are currently in the 80s in portions
of Southeast Texas; and as seasonal southerly flow re-establishes
itself, this extraordinarily rich tropical moisture will surge
into areas mainly east of the I-35 corridor on Tuesday. While
these intense dew points are difficult to maintain, readings
should still be as high as the mid 70s in East Texas at peak
heating. As a result, Tuesday afternoon may feature the highest
heat index values of the week.

Subtropical ridging will reorient itself near our latitude, but
mid-level heights will be rather ordinary for mid July. This
should mean a persistence forecast with highs a few degrees above
normal throughout the remainder of the week. A few locations may
tap 100 degrees, but a decent southerly breeze should help take
the edge off the heat. Although afternoon dew points will remain
unpleasant, a little better mixing later in the week should
gradually diminish afternoon heat index values.

Guidance is conflicted with how well the ridge will re-establish
itself, but the consensus favors the Four Corners by early next
week. Temperatures will likely remain above normal, but this
scenario would reduce the likelihood of extraordinary heat for the
upcoming weekend. It would also encourage sea breeze activity
during the Friday to Sunday time frame. However, the ridging
should still be strong enough to stifle its inland progress.

The GFS is anomalously strong with an Alberta Clipper this weekend
and an associated frontal surge into the Southern Plains with the
resulting northwest flow. While this would be a delight during the
dog days, this solution is both an outlier among extended
operational guidance and within the minority of GFS ensemble
members (a plurality of which favor seasonal ridging). This has
corrupted the extended blends, from which we removed the frontal
wind shift and associated precip chances.

25

&&

.PRELIMINARY POINT TEMPS/POPS...
Dallas-Ft. Worth    93  78  98  79  99 /   5   5   5   0   0
Waco                94  77  98  77  99 /  10   5   5   0   0
Paris               85  74  92  76  93 /  20  20  10   5   0
Denton              92  77  98  78  99 /   5   5   5   0   0
McKinney            91  76  98  78  98 /   5  10  10   0   0
Dallas              94  80  98  79  99 /   5   5   5   0   0
Terrell             91  76  98  78  99 /  10  10  10   0   0
Corsicana           92  77  94  75  95 /  10  10   5   0   0
Temple              93  76  97  76  97 /  20   5   5   0   0
Mineral Wells       93  75  98  75  98 /   0   0   5   0   0

&&

.FWD WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.
&&