000
FXUS64 KFWD 212034
AFDFWD

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Fort Worth TX
234 PM CST Sat Dec 21 2019


.SHORT TERM...

/Through Sunday/

Synopsis: Areas of fog are expected to develop tonight, with dense
fog likely to reduce visibility to around one-quarter mile north
of the Metroplex. Fog should dissipate by late morning Sunday,
with a cool but dry day to follow.

A stratus deck persists over North Texas this afternoon, which has
kept temperatures in the 40s. In Central Texas, the sun has broken
out, allowing temperatures to climb into the 50s. Rain has come to
an end across the region. As an astronomical note, today is the Winter
Solstice (the exact solstice will occur at 10:19 p.m. this
evening). On this shortest day of the year, the sun will set at
5:26 p.m. in DFW, and at 5:30 p.m. in Waco. The sun will not rise
again until 7:27 a.m. and 7:25 a.m. at DFW and Waco, respectively.
This equates about 14 hours of night, after about 10 hours of
daytime (which is way more than the 3 hours and 43 minutes of
daytime that will occur in Fairbanks, AK today).

Late tonight, temperatures will cool to near the dewpoint, with
clear to partly cloudy skies and light winds expected. Using the
crossover temperature method, and from looking at high-res model
guidance, fog appears likely to develop across much of North Texas
late tonight. Confidence is highest in fog developing near and
north of the Dallas/Fort Worth Metropolitan Area. For this reason,
and after coordination with the WFOs in Oklahoma, a Dense Fog
Advisory has been issued for areas north of DFW. This advisory may
need to be expanded southward later this evening, but for now,
opted to issue the advisory where confidence was the highest. The
onset of fog will likely be a little after midnight, with fog
persisting into the mid to late morning hours Sunday.

After the fog manages to dissipate, sunny skies should allow highs
to reach into the 50s, which is near normal for mid to late
December.

Godwin

&&

.LONG TERM...

/Monday through next weekend/

The upcoming week appears largely uneventful weather-wise. A very
pleasant Christmas Day is shaping up with what should be above
normal temperatures during the afternoon hours. The next shot of
rain/storms will not arrive until late in the week and into the
last weekend of 2019. There still remains some uncertainty in the
extended portion of the forecast, but there does appear to be a
risk for thunderstorms.

On the heels of the upper low that resulted in the dreary
conditions this weekend, ridging will overspread from the west and
southwest across the Lone Star State. This will equate to a
warming trend through a majority of the week. Daytime high
temperatures will remain largely in the upper 60s with some
locales in the 70s...particularly on Tuesday and Christmas Day.
These forecast highs are 10 to nearly 20 degrees above normal for
this time of year. There could be a bit more in the way of high
clouds on Christmas Day and Thursday when a broad trough will
eject out of the Four Corners region and into the Central Plains.
At this time, this feature is likely to remain too far to the
north and west to bring about any high impact sensible weather to
the area.

Toward the end of the week appears to be the next best chance for
showers and thunderstorms across North and Central Texas. There
does remain a fair amount of spread among deterministic and
ensemble guidance resulting in lower confidence in the forecast.
The latest GFS...though a little slower than previous model
iterations remains the swift outlier and ejects the trough very
quickly to the east and northeast. This results in a faster FROPA
and an earlier onset to rain chances. The Canadian and to a more
extreme degree the ECMWF are much slower and advertise a slow
moving cutoff low across northern Mexico. This pushes the best
rain/storm chances closer to Saturday and Sunday with a slower
FROPA. Historically, models that tend to advertise a more
progressive motion associated with these digging upper
troughs/lows have often been incorrect. With this in mind along
with the slightly stronger consensus for a slower solution, I`ve
leaned mostly on the Canadian and to some extent the ECMWF
guidance.

So what does this mean for our area? At this time, it`s looking
more likely that we will see appreciable chances for rain and
storms beginning on Friday and lasting through the last weekend of
2019. The greatest rain chances will be Friday night into
Saturday. It should be noted, however, that depending on the
speed/progression of the trough, the time period for the best
rain/storm chances will shift. What does appear apparent is that
there will be a pretty strong mid and upper level wind field
(500mb jet streak of around 90 knots across southwest OK). This
coupled with several days of decent moisture advection supports
deep moist convection--- with some organized convective modes
possible. We`ll certainly keep tabs on any potential for strong to
severe storms, but at this juncture it`s too early to advertise
these hazards given the uncertainty.

Bain

&&


.AVIATION... /Issued 1144 AM CST Sat Dec 21 2019/
/18Z TAFs/

Concerns -- Overnight/early morning fog potential in Metroplex.

Most TAF sites continue to report MVFR or intermittent IFR cigs at
this hour. Cigs should lift slowly and/or scatter out later this
afternoon. Late tonight... conditions should be favorable for
widespread BR/FG development across North Texas. Some model
guidance suggests that LIFR or even VLIFR will be possible in the
morning... but for now will stay on the conservative side and show
3/4 SM BR... mainly because of some uncertainty on when the lowest
visibility will occur. This will need to be refined in later
issuances. As for the onset time... visibility should begin to
drop around 07Z... with improvement likely in the hours after
sunrise Sunday.

Godwin

&&

.PRELIMINARY POINT TEMPS/POPS...
Dallas-Ft. Worth    41  52  35  66  42 /   0   0   0   0   0
Waco                37  57  32  69  36 /   0   0   0   0   0
Paris               36  51  34  62  33 /   0   0   0   0   0
Denton              35  51  33  67  37 /   0   0   0   0   0
McKinney            36  51  33  65  35 /   0   0   0   0   0
Dallas              40  53  37  67  42 /   0   0   0   0   0
Terrell             38  54  34  64  36 /   0   0   0   0   0
Corsicana           42  56  37  66  38 /   0   0   0   0   0
Temple              37  57  35  68  37 /   0   0   0   0   0
Mineral Wells       35  54  33  69  36 /   0   0   0   0   0

&&

.FWD WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
Dense Fog Advisory from 1 AM to 10 AM CST Sunday for TXZ091>095-
100>107.

&&

$$

24/37